In this, he was probably right, but picking a quarrel was not a sensible thing to do at that moment. Lloyd George, who mistrusted Haig, exploited the affair to put him under Nivelle’s orders, and was himself discredited when Nivelle’s own doings proved calamitous. This they duly did. The attack on 16 April against the Chemin des Dames meant driving Senegalese troops into a sleety blizzard, with a bombardment that the Germans had foreseen enough to keep their troops away from the dangerous zones. Nivelle had promised, as part of the formula, that he would break off the attack if he did not succeed in the first two days. He failed everywhere, except east of Rheims, and persisted with the attack, with predictable effect. By now, well-connected junior officers were able to tell deputies of the National Assembly how things were at the front, and the politicians had anyway only really accepted Nivelle because they thought he could play the British. And then came one of twentieth-century France’s encounters with reality: the troops rebelled – refusing to go any more into the charnel houses that their generals were expecting them to confront. Later on, when Communists were using certain episodes of the First World War as propaganda, the French mutinies of 1917 (like the Italian collapse somewhat later) became evidence that the working classes and the peasantry were rebelling. The matter was not so simple: a careful French historian, Guy Pedroncini,1 reckoned that about 40,000 of the men had been involved, those closest to the front, and had resumed discipline when talked to by sensible officers. Nivelle himself was soon dismissed, and the new commander, Philippe Pétain, had some sense of how morale might be restored: only forty-nine men were executed, and matters regarding leave and supply were made more humane. Did they want a German occupation? No. If they deserted, their womenfolk told them to go back. The army came back to order, but its generals had learned. Peátain appreciated that he must stick to small, competently organized operations, and these were indeed well staged. For instance the ‘Laffaux salient’, part of the Chemin des Dames, was taken back in August. For France, it would be jusqu’au bout, and an old radical nationalist, Clemenceau, took office. But in that same Nivelle spring, there began another mutiny, this time on an enormous scale: the Russian army was breaking up. The German calculation of 1914, that Russia could be defeated then, but not in a few years, was, in its own terms, perfectly accurate. By 1916 her output of war goods was at least adequate. What was not adequate was the organization that more advanced countries could show as regards transport, rationing, finance, national unity. The great cities filled up with refugees, and peasants crowded the trains as they migrated to find work; at the same time, the army’s demands on transport were such that trains were fewer, and the capital got only fifty grain wagons a day of the ninety it had had before the war. Privation, universally shared, might be tolerable. But some had fuel and food, and others did not; there was suspicion that Germans were everywhere in the woodwork, including the Tsar’s glowering spouse; and the ‘capitalists’ who coined it in from war work in Petrograd – as the capital had been, anti-Germanly, re-named – generally had foreign names. How do such situations turn fatal? Again, the inevitable accident. 8 March (23 February by the then Russian, religious, calendar) was International Women’s Day, and the working-class wives of the capital staged a demonstration against the rising price of bread. They were having to get up early, in freezing cold, and wait around, only to discover often enough that the bakery did not have fuel for the flour, or that the flour was being held back by ‘speculators’ in expectation of a price rise. In the first week of March the weather, which had been very cold, suddenly improved, which allowed demonstrations to go ahead. Again true to form for the Russia of that era, the Tsarist machinery for repression was altogether inadequate: not even glue for posters proclaiming martial law. As George Orwell remarked of eighteenth-century England, there was nothing between putting up your shutters and calling out the army. Briefly, the police attempted to control things, and a few martyrs resulted. Then the army was called out. But it now consisted of unwilling conscripts, living in giant barracks in the middle of the government quarter, and they were disaffected, smuggling in drink, getting close to the working-class women. In a more advanced country, such soldiers would have been housed on some Salisbury Plain, but old Russia could not have afforded the infrastructure. The troops, invited to fire at the crowds, struck on 27 February (12 March). Authority now collapsed. The streets were full of soldiers, charging around in lorries, waving red flags.