For Italian intervention, Indro Montanelli, L’Italia di Giolitti (Rizzoli, 1975) is wonderfully readable and given to the black humour that modern Italy sometimes brings out. On the Dardanelles campaign, Nigel Steel and Peter Hart, Defeat at Gallipoli (London, 2002) and Tim Travers, Gallipoli 1915 (London, 2001) are solid and very fair-minded. On the Armenian issue, Guenter Lewy, The Armenian Massacres in Ottoman Turkey (Utah, 2005) replaces everything, but Franz Werfel’s Vierzig Tage des Musa Dagh, originally written in 1932, woodenly translated into English, is a magnificent novel, taking some liberties with the history. Werfel wrote on his title page: nicht gegen Tuerken polemisieren, ‘do not use this against the Turks’. If only. On the blockade, G.-H. Soutou, L’Or et le sang (Paris, 1989) discusses (predatory) Allied economic war aims, and A. Offer, The First World War: An Agrarian Interpretation (Oxford, 1989) puts them in an interesting and original perspective. Gerd Hardach, The First World War (London, 1977) came as part of a series of books on economic history and is still the widest survey of a gigantic subject (on the financial aspects of which Niall Ferguson, op. cit., is the best introduction). Chapter 4: On Verdun there is a classic:Alistair Horne, The Price of Glory (London, 1978). Holger Afflerbach, Falkenhayn (Munich, 1996) corrects much of the legendry. On the Somme, the latest work is Peter Hart, The Somme (London, 2005). There is still much fighting over British strategy. John Terraine wrote a heroically unfashionable book in 1963, Haig, the Educated Soldier. It was the very moment when Oh ! What a Lovely War, as a sort of musical based on the soldiers’ songs, and then as a a film, appeared in London (and Paris) – the film, and even more the stage version, amounting to genius. Terraine’s defence has probably had the best of things, given the vast difficulties that Haig faced. Lyn Macdonald has done a wonderful job in collecting accounts of life in the trenches in each of the years of the First World War. Her Somme appeared in 1993. On Jutland, Arthur Marder, From the Dreadnought to Scapa Flow: The Royal Navy in the Fisher Era (5 vols., London 1961–70) is the established labour of love. Chapter 5: The background to the Central Powers’ peace offer is in Fritz Fischer, Griff nach der Weltmacht, translated (London, 1967)as Germany’s Aims in the First World War. On American intervention Barbara Tuchman, The Zimmermann Telegram (London, 1966) is a very good introduction (she was the daughter of ambassador Morgenthau in Istanbul). The French disasters of spring 1917 are laid out in G. Pedroncini, Les Mutineries de 1917 (Paris 1967). Prior and Wilson’s Passchendaele: The Untold Story (Yale, 1996) is a model account of a battle on the western front; but Leon Wolff, In Flanders Fields (London, 1958) is devastating; I read it (together with Robert Graves) one Christmas in my teens, and have never forgotten either.