In the early months of 1915, to counter the British blockade, ‘unrestricted’ submarine warfare – sink on sight – had been declared, a forbidden zone being demarcated around the British Isles, and the Lusitania passenger liner had been sunk, on 7 May 1915, with due loss of civilian life (1,201, of whom 128 were American citizens). There were strong American protests, and since the German navy did not have adequate numbers of submarines, Berlin backed down, and agreed that ‘cruiser rules’ would be respected. But in 1916, 108 submarines were built, together with a new pen for lighter ones at Zeebrugge in Belgium, from where the Channel transports could be threatened. The navy reckoned at the end of 1916 that it was ready for a new campaign of unrestricted submarine warfare. It presented memoranda, complete with figures, and two of the best-known economists at Berlin University, Max Sering and Gustav Schmoller, were brought in to opine as to the damage that would be done to the British economy. It would collapse, especially if Zeppelins dropped bombs on the grain depots in the Channel ports, they helpfully added. Admiral Holtzendorff said that he could sink 600,000 tons of shipping every month, that British shipping would be cut by half, that there would be food riots, and terrible distress in the trading areas. The Chancellor, Bethmann Hollweg, had to take a wider and more sceptical view. He knew in the first place that if Germany declared unrestricted submarine warfare, the United States would almost certainly come in to the war. His advisor, Helfferich, could read figures and said that the navy’s were a concoction. The new Austrian emperor, Karl, desperate for peace, objected, and the political parties of Left and Centre were also not enthusiastic. But against the military, and with a population that blamed its rat sausages and endless turnips on the British blockade, Bethmann Hollweg could make no headway. Smoking cigarette after cigarette, he tried a manoeuvre to escape from the problem. The four Central Powers declared on 12 December that they would engage upon negotiations over peace. President Wilson’s good offices were sought, and he did in fact allow the Germans what appeared to be a safe route for communications to their embassy in Washington. He then enquired as to what the peace terms were to be. The Allies had no great difficulty: they said that Belgium would have to be restored, that people should have the right to self-determination. Much of this was humbug, and among themselves they were talking about vast extensions of empires, quite without reference to ‘self-determination’. The Germans were silent as to their own terms, even when Wilson asked them privately what they had in mind. Bethmann Hollweg could not say that he would restore Belgium, because he did not intend to do so: Germany was fighting for a German Europe, in effect the Mitteleuropa programme partly realized at Brest-Litovsk a year later, and Belgium, with its French establishment and British leanings, did not belong. German industrialists were expecting to take over the considerable coal and iron reserves of Belgium, and the military at the very least wanted to take the fortifications of Liège with a view to any future war. The German Generalgouvernement in Brussels was also giving guarded encouragement to Flemish separatists, allowing Ghent University to use Flemish, which was regarded in educated circles as peasant stuff – a sort of corrupted Dutch. Bethmann Hollweg was stuck. If he said that Germany was fighting for goodness, beauty and truth, as the Allies claimed that they were doing, he would have been thrown out by a Ludendorff who was now the real master of Germany: the military and the industrialists were working themselves into a fever of annexationism, Belgian coalfields and French iron-ore mines one minute, strips of Poland, to be ethnically cleansed, the next. This left Bethmann Hollweg no alternatives, as regards statements of war aims, beyond silence and lies. British and French diplomats might equally have been embarrassed, and vast imperial plans were being cooked up in secret. But they always had the ostensibly unbeatable argument concerning the restoration of Belgium: at no point did Berlin say it would just restore the country. German diplomats were too clumsy to deal with this situation, and their peace initiative got nowhere. Bethmann Hollweg had no more arguments against the admirals. On 1 February 1917 a zone around western France and the British Isles was declared open to sinking upon sight. Admiral Holtzendorff, it appeared, was at once proved right. He now had 105 submarines (in June, 129). In January, under ‘cruiser rules’, 368,000 tons had gone down, 154,000 of them British. In February, 540,000. In March, nearly 600,000 (418,000British). In April, 881,000 (545,000). The sinkings generally occurred as ships bunched together to reach the ports, at the end of their voyage.