Hindenburg had taken the title ‘Supreme Commander in the East’ (shortened to Oberost) in November, his forces having doubled in number from the twenty divisions at the start, and there were now tussles between Ludendorff and Falkenhayn, who resented his popularity and thought his plans far too ambitious. However, the Austro-Hungarian emergency did force Falkenhayn to send four newly formed army corps to the Russian front, and, early in February, these attacked south-east from the Prussian border, in an affair called ‘the Winter Battle in Masuria’. In deep snow, the virtuosity of the German army was displayed, one Russian army being struck as it was forming up for an offensive, and another being taken so far by surprise that its commander, a man of seventy, had a nervous collapse and fled to the fortress of Kovno (he was sentenced to fifteen years’ hard labour). One Russian army corps was trapped in a forest, as at Tannenberg on a smaller scale. After that, attacks were exchanged on the Polish–East Prussian borders, and they tended to show that Falkenhayn was right, that Ludendorff was too ambitious: unless there were spectacular Russian blundering, German losses were too high for any gains that might emerge. In any case, Austria-Hungary now needed direct assistance. On 22 March, Przemysl surrendered, and the Russian force thus freed was used for an attack across the Carpathian passes, leading towards the great plain of Hungary, and there were fears even for Budapest. Early in April, on Easter Sunday, a German force, the Beskidenkorps, under one of their most competent generals, Georg von der Marwitz, had staved off the immediate danger, but matters could clearly only become worse if nothing more substantial were done. There was also a looming danger that everyone regarded as mortal: the likelihood of the intervention of Italy. How could Austria-Hungary take on a third front, and maybe even, if Romania came in as well, a fourth? Both were new states, their national unifications not completed, since the Habsburg empire had substantial Italian and Romanian populations. The Italians went one better, and looked at South Slav lands over the Adriatic, an empire in the Mediterranean at Turkey’s expense, as well as a cheap loan of £50,000,000. They greatly feared Germany, but the Austro-Hungarian emergency and the Allied landing at Gallipoli made up for this, and Italy, on 26 April, signed a Treaty of London with the Allies, guaranteeing intervention. A decision for war was pushed through a parliament that was not widely enthusiastic, and on 23 May the Italian ambassador in Vienna handed it over. In theory this should have been the end of Austria, but geography greatly helped. Most of the Austro-Italian border was very mountainous, and there was only about twenty miles of flat land, northwest of the great port of Trieste which was the Italians’ main objective. However, it was karst, flintstone, in which nothing grew and trenches could not be dug. Even the scratch forces that the Austrians put up managed to hold the initial attacks. Far from destroying Austria-Hungary, Italian intervention gave the war some point as far as many Slavs were concerned, and the Prague regiment was, in due course, reconstituted because its men gave a very good account of themselves on the Italian front. Besides, Italian intervention led Falkenhayn into one of the greatest successes of the war, in the east. Falkenhayn had had two main concerns. The first was to persuade Russia to abandon the war, and he needed some demonstration that she would never win it. The second was to persuade the Austro-Hungarians that they should make generous concessions to Italy, so as to fend off her intervention. This was difficult; if he told them that he proposed to send direct help, with a view to defeating Russia, then he might encourage them to refuse the Italian concessions. The preparations for an attack on Russia were therefore concealed even from Conrad, and the Kaiser himself was only told of the plan on 11 April. It was a good plan – an attack by a new army (the Eleventh) across rolling countryside north of the Carpathians, in the passes of which the Russians were attempting offensives. By now the land had dried out, and there would be no repetition of the calamitous Conrad doings in the snows. Over ten days, the eight divisions – 100,000 men and 1,000 guns – of Mackensen’s new Eleventh Army arrived east of Cracow by the end of April – the kind of railway performance of which Russians, especially, were not capable. They arrived at a very sensitive spot, an area where the Russians’ difficulties with war goods were compounded by a very messy strategic situation: their entire position was about to explode. The Russian army consisted of two Army Groups (or fronty). The North-western one had to deal with the Germans in East Prussia, who could attack south, east, even north, into the Baltic provinces.