The naval authorities, as a matter of professional pride, resented the inactivity of their great ships, but they had discovered how effective the submarine could be almost as soon as the war broke out, when U-29 sank three British battleships. If they could torpedo civilian ships supplying Great Britain, then the British ocean lifeline would be cut, and the British population would face the privation that Germans were undergoing in ‘the turnip winter’ of 1916–17. There were two great problems. The first was a formal one, that international law forbade the sinking, without warning, of civilian (and maybe neutral) ships. Common humanity said that people should have a chance to get to lifeboats, and in any case the ship might easily not be carrying war goods. Possibly, the USA would enter the war if American ships were sunk. These arguments were widely dismissed as Humanitätsdüselei – ‘humanitarian babbling’ – and in any case most Germans were by now convinced that the British were trying to starve them. They were also convinced, and not unfairly, that the USA had been quite disproportionately helpful to the Allies – especially with loans that held up the international value of the British pound and with trade that kept the French war economy going. If the USA did intervene, would it really make any significant difference? The second problem counted for more. The Germans did not, in 1915, have enough submarines – fifty-four, most carrying only four torpedoes, and short in range. They were supposed, on encountering a ship in British waters, to surface, enquire what was on board, inspect it and, where appropriate, allow the ship’s company to take to lifeboats before the ship was sunk. This proceeding – ‘cruiser rules’ – exposed a submarine to concealed guns, but the alternative – sinking upon sight, a torpedo gliding silently just below the waterline, against a ship containing women and children – counted as barbaric, inhuman (as Churchill had said in 1914: he could not even imagine such methods being used). In the early months of 1915, to counter the British blockade, ‘unrestricted’ submarine warfare – sink on sight – had been declared, a forbidden zone being demarcated around the British Isles, and the Lusitania passenger liner had been sunk, on 7 May 1915, with due loss of civilian life (1,201, of whom 128 were American citizens). There were strong American protests, and since the German navy did not have adequate numbers of submarines, Berlin backed down, and agreed that ‘cruiser rules’ would be respected. But in 1916, 108 submarines were built, together with a new pen for lighter ones at Zeebrugge in Belgium, from where the Channel transports could be threatened. The navy reckoned at the end of 1916 that it was ready for a new campaign of unrestricted submarine warfare.