His hope, and it dictated his doings, was that Russia could be persuaded to drop out and resume the partnership with Prussia that had reigned in much of the nineteenth century. He was a Bismarckian, not wishing, as Bismarck had said, ‘to tie the trim Prussian frigate to a worm-eaten Austrian galleon’, and he did not like the Austro-Hungarians, in his view frivolous Catholics with fancy manners (there was only one Catholic officer in the Prussian Guard – Franz von Papen, who ineptly organized sabotage of the American economy when he was military attacheá in Washington, and whose subsequent claim to fame is that he in effect appointed Hitler). Like Bismarck, Falkenhayn thought that Germany should never part company with Russia, and his relations with Conrad became, at times, frigid, to the point where he simply did not reveal major decisions that affected Austria-Hungary very greatly. At an important stage he even got his liaison officer to find out by stealth what the railway capacity north of Cracow was, so as to stage an offensive about which he told his allies only a week beforehand. At an even more vital point, he and Conrad quite separately planned grand, supposedly war-winning, attacks on France and Italy in complete isolation from each other. German peace-feelers towards Russia were left more or less ignored, though the brightest retired Tsarist statesmen would have taken up the offer. The western Powers had offered the Tsar Constantinople, which Falkenhayn could not do, and in any case there was a campaign, somewhat vicious, against the substantial German element in Russia, much of which dated back to the days of Catherine the Great, who had brought in German peasants to show the Russians how to practise agriculture. Land reform – land to the peasant – had been a great theme in Russian politics before 1914 and now, if you were a war hero, there were provisions for you to get confiscated German land. The Tsar’s German wife became a liability. At any rate, the Tsar was in no position to discuss peace terms with the Germans, unless, in effect, he had no choice. Therefore, German attacks in the east. Falkenhayn, like Churchill, knew that the west offered only stalemate, and he was quite right. He tried one final attack in the west, again at Ypres in April 1915, and it was, like unrestricted U-Boat warfare, another exercise in Prussian crassness. A new weapon had come to hand – poison gas, banned by The Hague conventions, but justified for the weaseling reason that French rifle-bullets also released a gas on impact. It was indeed a horrible weapon, coming to blind or wreck the lungs of its victims. It was first tried out on the Russian front, in January, but the extreme cold reduced its effectiveness. In April, gas was released from cylinders, and it did cause immediate panic among the British and Canadians. But then the Germans themselves had to advance into it, and makeshift answers were found – cotton wool soaked in urine held off the effects for half an hour, and, later, there were proper gas masks. In any case, although the Ypres salient became even more uncomfortable for the British, there was no breakthrough, and Falkenhayn would not have known what to do with one. His main aim was at Russia. Here, Falkenhayn had some good fortune, because the western Powers dispersed their effort between Gallipoli and the front in France. The latter caused fixation. On the map, the German line looked very vulnerable, because it bellied out in an extended salient, with Noyon, fifty miles from Paris, at the apex, and the French newspapers led every day with that news. Generals looking for favourable publicity were duly mesmerized: some new attack would bring about liberation of the national territory. British volunteers, in millions, had abandoned the boredom of life in industrial towns for the supposed glamour of a soldier’s existence and were ready and willing to go. Salients were vulnerable to attacks from the sides, Artois on the northern edge, where the British Expeditionary Force was building up its strength, and Champagne, north-east of Paris, on the southern edge. If the British and French could break through in either area, then they could ‘pour’ cavalry through the gap, and perhaps surround the Germans in the central part of this salient. Here was the stuff of fantasy, and elderly generals, their experiences formed from cavalry charges in the South African veldt or the sand-table campaigns of Morocco, dreamt of glory. How this appeared on the ground has been described in one of the classic memoirs of the war, Robert Graves’s Goodbye to All That. Graves was a public schoolboy, infused with the romantic patriotism of the time, and volunteered as he left Charterhouse. His regiment’s regular officers believed in rituals.