General Robert Nivelle almost wrecked the French army, and Field Marshal Sir Douglas Haig did a great deal to wreck the British one as well – the best Scottish general, it was said, in that he killed the most Englishmen. Nivelle was not a fool. This was a war that could be made mobile again if artillery was properly used. There were now thousands of guns and millions of shells, and there were new weapons. Aircraft, in 1914 too liable to break down, and only useful for spotting large bodies of men if the weather was right, were coming into their own. The pilot could now fire at the enemy along the nose of the plane without hitting his own propellors, and single-wing craft were brought in to replace the slow old biplanes. Aerial photography was now far more accurate, and tanks had been invented. Besides, the gunners’ communications improved (on the German side, telephone wire was buried six feet underground) and the ‘creeping barrage’ was becoming standard: Nivelle reckoned that it would win the war. A barrage that ran just sixty yards ahead of the infantry could silence the enemy until the attackers were within grenade-throwing range, and grenades had also improved. Infantry tactics needed to be changed: no advance in waves, let alone in the great clumps of 1914, but small parties, darting from shell-hole to shell-hole, diagonally, one part firing at the enemy to give cover for the other darting forward. Nivelle appreciated all of this, and from his Verdun successes thought that he had discovered a formula. He referred to chablons (‘pulleys’), meaning well-managed mutual support by all arms. Politically and personally he was also suitable. He was Protestant, and Protestants (usually engineers and doctors) were the backbone of the Third Republic, supplying the morality, the education, the spirit – including the Eiffel Tower. His mother was English, and he could charm London lunches (at which – as was ominously said – ladies were present) and explain his methods. Word got back to the Germans that something was impending. Needing to make more economical use of their forces, they shortened the line. The existing western front reflected the events of 1914, and had no logic to it. It was there because it was there: the front lines back in 1914 had frozen, as the two sides dug trenches, and all sides held positions that were vulnerable and expensive, purely and simply for reasons of prestige. British Ypres and French Verdun were surrounded on three sides, and the defenders suffered from enfilading fire, but the entire German position was unnecessarily long – troops were needed just to man it who could have been used for better purposes if the line was shortened. It ran, to no strategic value, in a great bulge from the Somme battlefield to the Chemin des Dames on a ridge north-east of Paris. Attacks from there, and from Arras to the north-west, in the British sector, could squeeze the sides of this useless salient. The sensible thing was to shorten the line and use the troops for something more positive. From 9 February to 18 March the Germans withdrew – operation ‘Alberich’, named after Wagner’s nasty dwarf, because cottages were booby-trapped, wells were poisoned and trees were ‘ringed’. The Allies moved into shattered territory, with no opportunity for its reconstitution. The withdrawal also wrecked Nivelle’s original plans, which had been based on careful calculation of German gun positions. Now, he had to do the homework all over again, and he had placed his reputation on the line: he was a newcomer, with a reputation to keep up, and to give up there and then would have been a shattering blow. The nightmare had to follow its course. In an effort to keep front-line morale high, he had decided to inform the troops directly of his plans. A copy of them was found on a sergeant whom the Germans captured in a trench raid. The British were supposed to drain off German reserves in the first instance, by an attack at Arras, and there was a considerable success on 9 April, when the Canadians captured Vimy ridge, the British emerging from concealment in the old cellars of the Burgundian town, and surprising a German defence that had ineptly allowed much of its strength to be shattered by careful bombardment of the front positions. Then Haig, as was his wont, battered on on foot as the Germans arrived by train, and failed to make any progress – even, for six weeks, keeping cavalry hanging around, clogging the roads, in the hope of some glad morning. Arras was a sign that a new type of warfare was emerging, in that the gunners now disposed of formidable quantities of shell, and knew how to use it. However, there were considerable problems with rear organization, and Nivelle’s relations with Haig became poor, the former intimating in contemptuous language that the British army was demanding too much of the railway network and squandering resources.